In this study we start by identifying a property of stochastic differential equations which are utilized in biological models. This property results in large transient bursts of stiffness which are not present in the mean of the trajectories which we denote as pathwise stiffness. Given that this is featured in state-switching models common in applications, we develop four approaches to tackle such equations. Our new methods build off of our previous work in adaptivity for high strong order methods and the theoretical work of Andreas Rossler. We develop a novel computational method for coefficient optimization of Runge-Kutta methods for stability to deduce new explicit high order Runge-Kutta methods with 2x-5x larger stability regions in the drift axis. In addition, we define an extension of L-stability to additive noise stochastic differential equations and derive two new strong order 1.5 L-stable methods. We give numerical evidence that the resulting ESDIRK method's implicit-explicit (IMEX) extension can achieve strong order 1.5. This would be the first higher order and adaptive IMEX method for SDEs. In addition, we derive versions of our methods which have automatic stiffness detection and develop and automated switching algorithm, the first such algorithm for integration of stochastic differential equations. To our knowledge, these are the first strong order 1.5 adaptive implicit schemes for SDEs, the first adaptive IMEX scheme for SDEs, and the first demonstration of stiffness detection in SDEs. Lastly, the true novelty of our methods resides in their efficiency. In benchmarks spanning from two to tens of thousands of stiff SDEs we demonstrate real-world efficiency gains with our methods of 6x-6000x. These methods are freely available in the DifferentialEquations.jl software which utilizes the high stability and adaptivity of to give fully automated solving of SDEs to end users. Together, our work gives domain experts new tools to easily and efficiently solve complex stochastic differential equation models.
